THE ANXIETY OF THE CLIENT: THE DATABASE AS A COMPOSITIONAL TOOL.

I began writing this paper with the intention of discussing the networked data source as a compositional tool, concentrating on how it could be possible to explore these generally available and in some way non-locatable information sources in a way that still could have some sense of regionality or place for the composer.  However, my research and listening to data sonification-based music brought a larger issue to my attention, which subsumes these issues of regional versus global.  When I came up with the term 'the anxiety of the client', I was thinking of an anxiety rooted in in the power relations between client and server machines, and the fact that although the client always feels like it is somewhere -- on your desk, for example -- the server has the magical power of invisibility and omnipresence.

Thinking more on this, I have come to the conclusion that what is problematic about data as a source of material, or sonification as a compositional approach, has less to do with network dynamics, and more with the nature of digital data.  The anxiety of the client is not ultimately about to its status relative to other machines, but of the relationship of the composer to digital data.  I see two aspects of this technique that create problematic situations for both composers and audiences:  One, the inevitably arbitrary nature of selecting parameters  in a work of sonification; and two, the conflict between the composer-as-technician and the composer-as-artist.  The first has its roots in the ontological status of the digital object, and the belief that objects in the digital world can have the same relationship to artistic production as objects in the nature. The second, based on the assumption that  working with these materials does not change the nature of the artistic subject, has led to a cognitive split between the Romantic subject as creator of art, and the digital client as data processor.  The idea of the autonomous artwork, free from the ideological constraints of church and state, has defined most musical activity since the time of Beethoven.  The current rapproachment between science and the arts, however, contains a great deal of ideology which resists this notion, and much sonification-based composition is unwittingly returning to a pre-Romantic state, in which art serves power, and allegory replaces expression.  

To clarify the essence of the conflict, I am using Adorno's ideas of mimetic and instrumental forms of knowledge.  According to Adorno, language, and art, is engaged in a dialectic between these two poles.  Instrumental rationality can be considered the use of the intellectual tools of reasoning -- logic and analysis -- for understanding.  He contrasts this approach with what he calls mimesis, which in its essence can be thought of as sympathetic language, in the broadest possible sense of the word -- using language to become something rather than describe it.  Messiaen, for example,  when he uses a piano to imitate birdsong, is performing a mimetic act, wheras using physical modeling to synthesize birdsong is an act of instrumental rationality.  The anxiety of the client lies in a misunderstanding or lack of awareness of this dialectic, and of how the materials we work with determine our relationship to these limits.  

Let us briefly examine the proximate historical situation which has led to the use of the database as a source of musical material.  This use derives from several parallel movements in postwar composition.  First to consider is the parameterized approach of later serialism.  Historically speaking, as the use of the row as a compositional tool spread from pitch to volume to timbre, a note became no more than a location on a multi-dimensional grid; an assemblage of parameters that had no independent existence other than its relative position in a multidemensional space of rows.  Secondly, Xenakis began to use techniques of mathematical modeling.  Obviously, his idea of using a mathematically-based model to create something that feels like a thunderstorm or a swarm of bees is not the same as the idea of mapping a thunderstorm onto a set of sonic parameters, but the introduction of the idea of directly expressing natural phenomena through the medium of their mathematical descriptions is critical.  For the first time, music looked to mathematics not as a representation or expression of an ideal, in the Keplerian sense of the music of the spheres, but rather as a representation of reality itself.  The concept of a rationally generated imitation of nature in music has entered the picture.  On the one hand, the musical event loses its substance as it is progressively reduced to an expression on a grid; on the other, the jurisdiction of the grid expands to become commensurate with reality.  Finally, one must contend with the unavoidable presence of Cage. Although much of his work did use a computer to model the results of what is in the end a real-world phenomenon: the casting of joss sticks, the truly new feature that Cage added to this mix was his denial of personal authority as a composer.  (To what extent he actually "let the sounds be themselves" as a composer is questionable.  What is important is that he made the claim, and the issue of the composer's authority has remained problematic ever since.)  The result of this has been the invention of a well-defined ground on which the composer can stand as a pure witness, merely recording events that can be plotted onto the parameterized musical domain.  All of these trends aligned in Charles Dodge's 1971 composition Earth's Magnetic Field, probably the first contemporary work of database art in any medium.  Given the demand that contemporary art must endlessly remake itself, and the development of new technologies, it is no surprise that the database, or the network, or any source of numbers, is now considered fruitful material for musical composition.

We will explore some of these ideas in the context of two of the more successful works in the field:  Atmospherics, an audio work by Andrea Polli, and Listening Post, an audio-visual installation by Mark H. Hansen and Ben Rubin.  These pieces take very different approaches to their materials, with very different results, but they have more in common than may superficially appear to be the case.

Here is how Polli describes Atmospherics :  
Two historic storms that devastated the New York/Long Island area were re-created first through data, then through sound. The resulting turbulent and evocative compositions allow listeners to experience geographically scaled events on a human scale and gain a deeper understanding of some of the more unpredictable complex rhythms and melodies of nature.

[play example]

Full disclosure: I worked on this piece developing the mapping & spatialization software.   

This is the most common approach to sonifying data: take a multidimensional set of data, correspond them to musical parameters, and play them along the time axis.  In this work, information such as wind speed and air pressure are mapped directly onto parameters such as  pitch, volume,and filter cutoff frequency.  Aside from scaling the data into ranges that make them audible, the aim is to keep them in as pure a state as possible.  The dominant compositional trope of this piece is compression: The time-scale of the storms are reduced from days to minutes, and the meteorological variables are compressed to fit in the human ear.  Obviously, we as listeners have no idea which data is affecting which parameter, and although there is a sense of movement, there is no feeling of the necessity or internal coherence of that movement.  Even if a composition is randomly generated, its authority as an aesthetic object is rooted in a subjective sense: A certain piece is this way because it must be this way, it is a perfect expression of itself, even if that self is contingent.  In the world of data composition, what is contingent is not the data, but the parameters.  Atmospherics is Cage turned on his head: instead of a rigorous system of parameters filled with unpredictable data, this is a rigorous set of data shaped by unpredictable parameters.  This is the utter victory of content over form, of the objective over the subjective. 

Here is the point at which we see the first aspect of the anxiety of the client: What data should correspond with which parameter?  I believe that the source of this difficulty is innate to the nature of the dataset as an object of aesthetic exploration.  Digital data is purely instrumental information, devoid of anything resembling Adorno's concept of the mimetic.  Once an event is reduced to a data structure, there is no mode of expresssion which could be considered natural to it, so any one is as good as any other. 

Let us consider for a moment the nature of the digital object, and our relations to it.  Seismic movements, for example, can be quantified and stored, and that information can be manipulated, examined, and abstracted independent from the events themselves.  Once this representation has been extracted, it has become disconnected from reality, and our only avenue of access to it is  the computer.  We are not the intended audience, the computer is.  Once something has undergone this process of alienation and has been transformed into a computer-friendly format, it is no longer accessible to the process of mimesis -- it has been wholly absorbed into the system of instrumental rationality.   It has for all intents and purposes been turned into something with much the same existential status as money: exchangable for everything, but in itself worthless.   Is it then possible to recuperate data, something that is not even directly available to our senses, to the aesthetic sensibility? 

This leads us back to the question of ideology.  We have absorbed information theory and the cognitive model of the computer as our metaphor for the world, and accept unhesitatingly that everything can be distilled into information, as research applies the tools of instrumental rationality to a progressively larger field.  Implicit in this way of thinking is that data -- abstracted information about real things -- underlies things themselves as a sort of neo-Platonic essence.  We make art out of data because that is all there is.  The more music bases itself on these assumptions, the more it loses its autonomy as it is absorbed by the myth that data is the Absolute, the zero degree of the world itself.  This claim to mystical objectivity further removes  the personal authority of the composer.  Music becomes a conduit, an aestheticized transfer of information, and no more.  

Now we can see why the compositional technique of data sonification is forever caught in a conflict:  As data is indeterminately interchangable, there is no quality inherent in it that implies that it needs to be expressed in any particular way.  At the same time, since the data is unavailable to mimesis, there is no way to make a decision based on the subjectivity of the composer, no access to any meaning that extends beyond function.  This is why composers and developers of these works invoke objective assertions about aesthetics.   The only possible claims they can make in terms of why to choose one one set of parameters rather than another are the standards of good design: clarity, comprehensibility, ease of understanding -- all functional aesthetic concerns which have been throughly colonized by capitalist production. 

Although I have focused on the ontological status of data while discussing Atmospherics, much of what I have just said applies in many ways to Hansen & Rubin's Listening Post.  This installation, however, most clearly illustrates a different aspect of the anxiety of the client:  the cognitive conflict between the Romantic subject -- the autonomous creator of artworks -- who, responding to the environment, creatively recapitulates it by the means of imagination, and the digital client that examines and manipulates data, re-presenting them in order to increase our knowledge.

To quote from Hansen & Rubin's press materials:

"Listening Post is an art installation that culls text fragments in real time from thousands of unrestricted Internet chat rooms, bulletin boards and other public forums. The texts are read (or sung) by a voice synthesizer, and simultaneously displayed across a suspended grid of more than two hundred small electronic screens."  

It is divided into six movements, each quite different from the next [can I maybe get chunks of two?]

[play sample]

Using statistical analysis and data mining, Listening Post prunes the vast flow of online talk down to a highly aestheticised synecdoche.  This work obviously shows many more signs of aesthetic intervention than Polli's, which is happy to let the data speak for itself.  Listening Post's six-part structure, its visual aspects, and even the simplicity of its musical elements, show a strong artistic hand at work.  By virtue of its speech content, it also has a certain empathic and narrative quality. 

In this work we are dealing with a different compositional trope -- not compression, but distillation.  Thousands of online contacts between people are monitored by Listening Post, and it is no irony that the most sophisticated techniques of surveillance and social control generate this work.  Language itself is reduced to data.  Generalized Sequence Mining and Minimum Description Length algorithms turn our most personal form of expression into so much grist for the analysis mill.  This work is probably the ne plus ultra of contemporary data art: the ultimate extension of digitizing rationalism as presented for aesthetic consumption.  Yet at the same time, the piece is unquestionably beautiful, and even contains a certain pathos with its mechanized echoes of thousands of voices seeking contact in the electronic void.  Listening Post employs strategies of domination as a means to an inarguably expressive end.  Here is the client in its most contradictory manifestation: simultaneously holding out the promise of empathy with our fellow humans, while actually playing the role of rationalized master of its virtual world of information.

The instrumental and the mimetic forms of knowledge imply two different kinds of knowers.  What this piece represents is the complete absorption of the subject, of subjectivity itself, into the client.  The following is from a paper describing an earlier version of Listening Post:

....Our goal is to create a sonification which is both communicative and listenable.  ...  Our design incorporates spatialization, pitch and timbral differentialization, and rhythm to achieve clarity in the presentation of the hierarchically structured data coming from the statistics engine.

I think it is evident what kind of thought we are seeing at work here.  This is a perfect example of instrumental cognition applied to the aesthetic field -- transparency, ease of use -- the values one associates with a well-designed product.  These concerns are not irrelevant to composition, but they should not be its guiding principles.  

We have a habit of identifying with the artist as our guide through the world he has created -- Virgil is to Dante as Dante is to us. In this piece, it is plain that aesthetic choices have been made, and the mark of those choices cannot help but invoke the image of the artist as a mimetic and sympathetic force who shapes the work.  But our Dante has abnegated all responsibility for what he has created -- the instrumental imperatives of communicativity and listenability have determined his decisions. He has built a Hell, but shoved us in and slammed the door.  Once inside, we are at the mercy of a self-generating system, a research project into our very minds that is only justified by the demands of the client that  collects, abstracts, and re-presents.  The paradox of the client as subject becomes our own as we participate and co-conspire in the artwork.  Data lurks behind not only the physical phenomena of the world, but behind our interiority, as the very possibility of the subject dissolves into the inaccessible world of data.   


Does this mean that the entire undertaking of sonification or data examination is inexorably doomed to be no more than a continued advance of instrumental rationalization?  To go beyond these pitfalls, artists need to have some awareness of the risks of the realm they are working in, as well as a light touch and a bit of quirkiness.  Historically, we should look to Raymond Roussel and Eric Satie, who could look at the apparently airtight and self-consistent system of the instrumental at previously unimagined angles to break its systematic hold.  A fine example of contemporary work which is exploiting, rather than being exploited by, the anxiety of the client is Yasunao Tone's Man'yo Wounded 2001.  As a data sonification, it is an exemplary work of Situationist tournage. 

[play]

 In this piece, he uses the pen tool in an audio editing program to write Japanese characters, and then synthesizes the results as sound.  He wedges open a weak spot in the digital model by exploiting the inability of the computer to distinguish one bit from another, recuperating language from the data realm simply by presenting it to the computer in a way it is not programmed to understand.  In its gleeful disregard of the instrumental imperatives of input and output, Tone's work shows us a route to incorporating data that is intelligent, playful, and perhaps gets most directly to the heart of mimesis in art: Aesthetic success does not depend on the ways in which an artwork resembles reality, but the ways in which it does not.